content/reference/prompt-optimization-dspy/index.md, before:

---
title: "Prompt Optimization with DSPy"
date: 2025-03-04T18:47:37+01:00
draft: false
---
    
## Language model program optimization

![[TODO: Add general optimization algorithm diagram or get below latex code to render]]
```
\usepackage{algorithm}
\usepackage{algorithmic}

\begin{algorithm}[H]
\caption{Optimize $\Phi$ with optimizer $M$}
\label{alg:optimize}
\begin{algorithmic}[1]
\Require Optimizer $M$, Initial Program $\Phi$, Metric $\mu$
\Require Max Iterations $I$, Training Data $\mathcal{D}$
\Require Minibatch size $B$, Proposer Hyperparameters $\theta$
\Ensure Optimized version of $\Phi$
\State $M.\text{Initialize}(\mathcal{D}, \theta)$ \Comment{Initialize optimizer using the data}
\For{$k \gets 1$ to $I$}
    \State $(\mathcal{V} \to S_k) \gets M.\text{Propose}(\theta)$ \Comment{Generate proposal}
    \State $\mathcal{D}_k \gets \{(x_j, x_j') \sim \mathcal{D}\}_{j=1}^B$ \Comment{Sample size-$B$ batch}
    \State $\sigma \gets \frac{1}{B} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}_k} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$ \Comment{Validate updated program}
    \State $M.\text{Update}(\mathcal{V} \to S_k, \sigma)$ \Comment{Update optimizer based on the observed validation score}
\EndFor
\State $(\mathcal{V} \to S_k) \gets M.\text{ExtractOptimizedSets}()$
\State \Return $\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S}$
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```
TODO: Would like to render algorithms nicely using https://github.com/SaswatPadhi/pseudocode.js

Lets consider the task [HotpotQA](https://hotpotqa.github.io/)  where we want to answer a question using two relevant passages retrieved from Wikipedia articles. An example from the dev set is given below:

|                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Golden Paragraph A** | **Dave Pirner Article** <br>David Anthony "Dave" Pirner (born April 16, 1964) is an American songwriter, singer, and producer best known as the lead vocalist and frontman for the alternative rock band Soul Asylum. |
| **Golden Paragraph B** | **Les McKeown Article** <br>Leslie Richard McKeown (born 12 November 1955) is a Scottish pop singer who was the lead singer of the Bay City Rollers during their most successful period.                              |
| **Question**           | What type of profession do Dave Pirner and Les McKeown both have?                                                                                                                                                     |
| **Answer**             | Singer                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

 A program $\Phi$ to solve the task is given below. The two modules $m_1$ and $m_2$ are `generate_query` and `generate_answer` respectively, which are parameterized by their internal prompt templates $p_1, p_2$. 

```python
class MultiHop(dspy.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        self.retrieve = dspy.Retrieve(k=3)
        self.generate_query = dspy.ChainOfThought("context, question -> search_query")
        self.generate_answer = dspy.ChainOfThought("context, question -> answer")
    
    def forward(self, question):
        context = []
        for hop in range(2):
            query = self.generate_query(context, question).search_query
            context += self.retrieve(query).passages
        return self.generate_answer(context, question).answer
```

### Initialize the optimizer using the data.
This step is quite optimizer specific. At the minimum it passes hyperparameter information to the optimizer. This is also where we would generate bootstrapped examples.

### Generate a proposal using the optimizer
Each prompt template $p_i$ has a set of variables (open slots) that we fill in before passing the final prompt to the LLM. The collection $\mathcal{V} \to S_k$ means the prompt templates we use at the $k^{th}$ iteration of our optimization loop. For example we might use this template for the `generate_answer` module:

```python
f"""
Given the following context answer the question.

Context:
{paragraph_a}

{paragraph_b}

Question:
{question}

Answer:
"""
```

This generation procedure is specific to the optimizer $M$ and the hyperparameters $\theta$.
### Sample a batch
Pretty straightforward, sample $B$ examples from our dataset in order to compute a validation score.
### Validate updated program
The score for a particular example $(x, x')$ is $\mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$. An example in this setting is a question/answer pair, not including the golden retrieved paragraphs. For our program a metric $\mu$ that makes sense is exact match, i.e. are the answers exactly equal. $\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}$ means our program with the  $k^{th}$ version of all our prompt templates. So in words $\sigma \gets \frac{1}{B} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}_k} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$ is how well the $k^{th}$ version of our program performs wrt on the examples in batch $B$

Interesting to note is that the validation score is computed on the program level and not on the module level as the metric only looks at the program output $x'$. This is why although we have access to the golden retrieved passages, we do not compare the actual retrieved passages and use this information to update the optimizer. This limitation is explicitly stated in [the paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) as "the metric $\mu$ provides supervision only at the level of the entire task, so every variable in $V$ is latent".
### Update optimizer based on the observed validation score
This is also very optimizer specific, but at a high level we want to update the way we propose new prompt templates given the validation score on the current set of prompts.
### Extract optimized sets
This step of the algorithm is to update the program with the "best" prompt templates. Usually taking the proposed templates with highest validation score.

# Optimizer specifics
## Bootstrap Demonstrations with Random Search

### Bootstrapping without random search

Bootstrapping few shot examples requires we specify the number of demonstrations we want to generate, then for each example $(x, x')$ in the shuffled training set run the example through our unoptimized program to get a predicted output $\Phi(x)$. We then include an example $(x, \Phi(x))$ as a bootstrapped demonstration if it is "good enough" as measured by our metric, i.e.  $\mu(\Phi(x), x') \geq \lambda$ for some threshold $\lambda$. 

Bootstrapping is most useful when our training set does not have labels, i.e. we have $x$ and not $(x, x')$. The metric $\mu$ is implemented in such cases as a conditional function, for example for the HotpotQA task it might be:
$$
\mu(\Phi(x), x') =
\begin{cases} 
\Phi(x) == x', & \text{if } x' \text{ is present}, \\
\text{FactuallyCorrect}(x, \Phi(x)), & \text{otherwise }
\end{cases}
$$

Where the function $\text{FactuallyCorrect}(x, \Phi(x))$ is some function that determines the quality of the predicted output, this can even be a call to a LLM. In the DSPy framework this might look something like:

```python
# Define the signature for automatic assessments.
class AssessFactuality(dspy.Signature):
    """Assess if the answer to the question is supported by the context."""
    question = dspy.InputField()
    context = dspy.InputField()
    answer = dspy.InputField()
    assessment: bool = dspy.OutputField()
    
def validate_answer(example, pred, trace=None):
	if trace is not None:
		# If we're "bootstrapping"
		factually_correct = dspy.Predict(AssessFactuality)
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=example.answer)
		
	return example.answer == pred.answer
```

The resulting program would be one with an updated prompt template now containing few shot examples. For example:

```python
f"""
Context:
Tropical Fish Hobbyist Magazine (abbreviated as "TFH Magazine") is a bi-monthly magazine geared to hobbyist keepers of tropical fish, with news and information on a variety of topics including: Care & Maintenance, Aquascaping, Husbandry, Health and Breeding, Species Reports, Aquarium Technology, Aquarium Science, Exploration & Collecting.

Curve is a lesbian magazine published in the United States. It covers news, politics, social issues, and includes celebrity interviews and stories on entertainment, pop culture, style, travel, and a website that hosts an internet forum focusing on lesbian issues, active since 2000.

Question:
Do Tropical Fish Hobbyist and Curve cover the same topic?

Answer:
no

[... other few-shot examples ...]

Context:
{paragraph_a}

{paragraph_b}

Question:
{question}

Answer:
"""
```

This corresponds to [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) in DSPy. 
### Random search over bootstrapped few-shot programs
Now that we have a way to generate prompt templates containing automatically generated few-shot examples. All the random search does it generate a set of candidate programs with shuffled training data and various numbers of few-shot examples, then selects the best performing candidate. This is [BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/random_search.py#L26) in DSPy. 

Simplified descriptions of the algorithms for [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) and [BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/random_search.py#L26) are described in [the original DSPy paper](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sY5N0zY5Od) in appendices H.1 and H.2. Further information is also available at [DSPy Optimizers (formerly Teleprompters)](https://dspy.ai/learn/optimization/optimizers/)
## MIPRO

![The MIPRO optimizer](mipro-diagram.png "[The MIPRO optimizer](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695). In Step 1, demonstrations are bootstrapped using the same process from Step 1 of Bootstrap Random Search. In Step 2, instructions are proposed using the grounding strategy described in 3.1. In Step 3, Bayesian optimization is used to find the best performing combination of instruction and demonstration candidates.")

### Bootstrap demonstrations
Run [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) as described in the previous section to get candidate sets of demonstrations. 
### Propose instruction candidates
Using a 'proposer' LLM based program we can generate candidate instructions for $\Phi$. The one used in DSPy looks like:
```python
class GenerateSingleModuleInstruction(dspy.Signature):
    """
    Use the information below to learn about a task that we are trying to solve
    using calls to an LM, then generate a new instruction that will be used to
    prompt a Language Model to better solve the task.
    """

    dataset_description = dspy.InputField(
        desc="A description of the dataset that we are using."
    )
    program_code = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Language model program designed to solve a particular task."
    )
    program_description = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Summary of the task the program is designed to solve, and how it goes about solving it."
    )
    module = dspy.InputField(
        desc="The module to create an instruction for."
    )
    task_demos = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Example inputs/outputs of our module."
    )
    previous_instructions = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Previous instructions we've attempted, along with their associated scores."
    )
    basic_instruction = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Basic instruction."
    )
    tip = dspy.InputField(
        desc="A suggestion for how to go about generating the new instruction."
    )
    proposed_instruction = dspy.OutputField(
        desc="Propose an instruction that will be used to prompt a Language Model to perform this task."
    )
```

The above proposer program will use an LM decide which of the input fields are relevant to include in the output proposed instruction. We can also do this explicitly by only providing a random subset of the input fields. By default, it seems that the [propose_instructions function](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/main/dspy/teleprompt/mipro_optimizer_v2.py#L416) generates diverse instructions by 1) Randomly picking a tip 2) Randomly including previous instructions 3) Temperature is non-zero. The tips mentioned in the [paper in appendix C.2](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) are:
```python
python_tips = {
    "none": "",
    "creative": "Don't be afraid to be creative!",
    "simple": "Keep the instruction clear and concise.",
    "description": "Make sure your instruction is very informative and descriptive.",
    "high_stakes": "The instruction should include a high-stakes scenario in which the LM must solve the task!",
    "persona": "Provide the LM with a persona that is relevant to the task (e.g., 'You are a ...')."
}
```

A personal favorite high stakes scenario I saw when running the code was that the LM was told a nuclear meltdown would occur if it did not solve the task. 

### Search combinations
The result is that we should have for each module a set of diverse instructions and a collection of sets of bootstrapped demonstrations. MIPRO then treats these two parameters as categorical variables for a Bayesian model (a Tree-structured Parzen Estimator, see [this paper for details](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf)) and then picks the best combination of instruction and demonstrations. This is done using [optuna](https://github.com/optuna/optuna)to perform the Bayesian optimization:

```python
sampler = optuna.samplers.TPESampler(seed=seed, multivariate=True)
study = optuna.create_study(direction="maximize", sampler=sampler)
study.optimize(objective, n_trials=num_trials)
```

The [objective function](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/main/dspy/teleprompt/mipro_optimizer_v2.py#L502) is the the average metric over all data in the training set i.e. $\frac{1}{|\mathcal{D}|} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S}(x), x')$. Important to note that if $x'$ is not provided, we need to ensure that our metric can still return a score even without a ground truth label. For example, we would need to update the metric described in [Bootstrapping without random search](#bootstrapping-without-random-search) to handle the case where `example.answer` is missing:
```python
def validate_answer(example, pred, trace=None):
	factually_correct = dspy.Predict(AssessFactuality)
	if trace is not None:
		# If we're "bootstrapping"
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=example.answer)
		
	if example.answer is None:
		# If ground truth not provided
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=pred.answer)
		
	return example.answer == pred.answer
```

### MIPRO++
In vanilla MIPRO our Bayesian model has two categorical parameters: 1) An instruction 2) A set of demonstrations. However the MIPRO++ variant suggests instead directly optimizing the  proposal hyperparameters, i.e. to include a given input field or not, as well as the demonstrations. However the authors do not run any experiments with full MIPRO++ rather only the 0-shot variation where they optimize the instruction only. In [section 4.4 of the paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) they specify which input fields they include which confusingly states one of the variables as "selects a specific set of bootstrapped demos to show to the proposer LM (categorical)". My understanding is these demonstrations are only included to guide the instruction generation LM and are not included in the output. But it is such a natural step to have the including the demonstrations in the output as another categorical variable I am a bit puzzled why the authors do not include this. The code for MIPRO++ (or the 0-shot variant) is not provided anywhere. Very puzzling.

In any case, one interesting side-effect of the 0-shot MIPRO++ approach is it allows us to see the learned importance scores from the Bayesian model e.g [Figure 6](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695)
![[TODO: Add MIPRO++ diagram]]

## References
1. [Optimizing Instructions and Demonstrations for Multi-Stage Language Model Programs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695)
2. [DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sY5N0zY5Od)
3. [TextGrad: Automatic “Differentiation” via Text](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.07496)
4. [Demonstrate–Search–Predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive NLP](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.14024)
5. [DSPy Assertions: Computational Constraints for Self-Refining Language Model Pipelines](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.13382)
6. [Algorithms for Hyper-Parameter Optimization](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf)
7. [Bayesian Optimization with extensions, applications, and other sundry items](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5nqEHpdyoE)

Commit message:

Add Learned hyperparameter importances figure.

content/reference/prompt-optimization-dspy/index.md, after:

---
title: "Prompt Optimization with DSPy"
date: 2025-03-04T18:47:37+01:00
draft: false
---
    
## Language model program optimization

![[TODO: Add general optimization algorithm diagram or get below latex code to render]]
```
\usepackage{algorithm}
\usepackage{algorithmic}

\begin{algorithm}[H]
\caption{Optimize $\Phi$ with optimizer $M$}
\label{alg:optimize}
\begin{algorithmic}[1]
\Require Optimizer $M$, Initial Program $\Phi$, Metric $\mu$
\Require Max Iterations $I$, Training Data $\mathcal{D}$
\Require Minibatch size $B$, Proposer Hyperparameters $\theta$
\Ensure Optimized version of $\Phi$
\State $M.\text{Initialize}(\mathcal{D}, \theta)$ \Comment{Initialize optimizer using the data}
\For{$k \gets 1$ to $I$}
    \State $(\mathcal{V} \to S_k) \gets M.\text{Propose}(\theta)$ \Comment{Generate proposal}
    \State $\mathcal{D}_k \gets \{(x_j, x_j') \sim \mathcal{D}\}_{j=1}^B$ \Comment{Sample size-$B$ batch}
    \State $\sigma \gets \frac{1}{B} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}_k} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$ \Comment{Validate updated program}
    \State $M.\text{Update}(\mathcal{V} \to S_k, \sigma)$ \Comment{Update optimizer based on the observed validation score}
\EndFor
\State $(\mathcal{V} \to S_k) \gets M.\text{ExtractOptimizedSets}()$
\State \Return $\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S}$
\end{algorithmic}
\end{algorithm}
```
TODO: Would like to render algorithms nicely using https://github.com/SaswatPadhi/pseudocode.js

Lets consider the task [HotpotQA](https://hotpotqa.github.io/)  where we want to answer a question using two relevant passages retrieved from Wikipedia articles. An example from the dev set is given below:

|                        |                                                                                                                                                                                                                       |
| ---------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| **Golden Paragraph A** | **Dave Pirner Article** <br>David Anthony "Dave" Pirner (born April 16, 1964) is an American songwriter, singer, and producer best known as the lead vocalist and frontman for the alternative rock band Soul Asylum. |
| **Golden Paragraph B** | **Les McKeown Article** <br>Leslie Richard McKeown (born 12 November 1955) is a Scottish pop singer who was the lead singer of the Bay City Rollers during their most successful period.                              |
| **Question**           | What type of profession do Dave Pirner and Les McKeown both have?                                                                                                                                                     |
| **Answer**             | Singer                                                                                                                                                                                                                |

 A program $\Phi$ to solve the task is given below. The two modules $m_1$ and $m_2$ are `generate_query` and `generate_answer` respectively, which are parameterized by their internal prompt templates $p_1, p_2$. 

```python
class MultiHop(dspy.Module):
    def __init__(self):
        self.retrieve = dspy.Retrieve(k=3)
        self.generate_query = dspy.ChainOfThought("context, question -> search_query")
        self.generate_answer = dspy.ChainOfThought("context, question -> answer")
    
    def forward(self, question):
        context = []
        for hop in range(2):
            query = self.generate_query(context, question).search_query
            context += self.retrieve(query).passages
        return self.generate_answer(context, question).answer
```

### Initialize the optimizer using the data.
This step is quite optimizer specific. At the minimum it passes hyperparameter information to the optimizer. This is also where we would generate bootstrapped examples.

### Generate a proposal using the optimizer
Each prompt template $p_i$ has a set of variables (open slots) that we fill in before passing the final prompt to the LLM. The collection $\mathcal{V} \to S_k$ means the prompt templates we use at the $k^{th}$ iteration of our optimization loop. For example we might use this template for the `generate_answer` module:

```python
f"""
Given the following context answer the question.

Context:
{paragraph_a}

{paragraph_b}

Question:
{question}

Answer:
"""
```

This generation procedure is specific to the optimizer $M$ and the hyperparameters $\theta$.
### Sample a batch
Pretty straightforward, sample $B$ examples from our dataset in order to compute a validation score.
### Validate updated program
The score for a particular example $(x, x')$ is $\mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$. An example in this setting is a question/answer pair, not including the golden retrieved paragraphs. For our program a metric $\mu$ that makes sense is exact match, i.e. are the answers exactly equal. $\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}$ means our program with the  $k^{th}$ version of all our prompt templates. So in words $\sigma \gets \frac{1}{B} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}_k} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S_k}(x), x')$ is how well the $k^{th}$ version of our program performs wrt on the examples in batch $B$

Interesting to note is that the validation score is computed on the program level and not on the module level as the metric only looks at the program output $x'$. This is why although we have access to the golden retrieved passages, we do not compare the actual retrieved passages and use this information to update the optimizer. This limitation is explicitly stated in [the paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) as "the metric $\mu$ provides supervision only at the level of the entire task, so every variable in $V$ is latent".
### Update optimizer based on the observed validation score
This is also very optimizer specific, but at a high level we want to update the way we propose new prompt templates given the validation score on the current set of prompts.
### Extract optimized sets
This step of the algorithm is to update the program with the "best" prompt templates. Usually taking the proposed templates with highest validation score.

# Optimizer specifics
## Bootstrap Demonstrations with Random Search

### Bootstrapping without random search

Bootstrapping few shot examples requires we specify the number of demonstrations we want to generate, then for each example $(x, x')$ in the shuffled training set run the example through our unoptimized program to get a predicted output $\Phi(x)$. We then include an example $(x, \Phi(x))$ as a bootstrapped demonstration if it is "good enough" as measured by our metric, i.e.  $\mu(\Phi(x), x') \geq \lambda$ for some threshold $\lambda$. 

Bootstrapping is most useful when our training set does not have labels, i.e. we have $x$ and not $(x, x')$. The metric $\mu$ is implemented in such cases as a conditional function, for example for the HotpotQA task it might be:
$$
\mu(\Phi(x), x') =
\begin{cases} 
\Phi(x) == x', & \text{if } x' \text{ is present}, \\
\text{FactuallyCorrect}(x, \Phi(x)), & \text{otherwise }
\end{cases}
$$

Where the function $\text{FactuallyCorrect}(x, \Phi(x))$ is some function that determines the quality of the predicted output, this can even be a call to a LLM. In the DSPy framework this might look something like:

```python
# Define the signature for automatic assessments.
class AssessFactuality(dspy.Signature):
    """Assess if the answer to the question is supported by the context."""
    question = dspy.InputField()
    context = dspy.InputField()
    answer = dspy.InputField()
    assessment: bool = dspy.OutputField()
    
def validate_answer(example, pred, trace=None):
	if trace is not None:
		# If we're "bootstrapping"
		factually_correct = dspy.Predict(AssessFactuality)
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=example.answer)
		
	return example.answer == pred.answer
```

The resulting program would be one with an updated prompt template now containing few shot examples. For example:

```python
f"""
Context:
Tropical Fish Hobbyist Magazine (abbreviated as "TFH Magazine") is a bi-monthly magazine geared to hobbyist keepers of tropical fish, with news and information on a variety of topics including: Care & Maintenance, Aquascaping, Husbandry, Health and Breeding, Species Reports, Aquarium Technology, Aquarium Science, Exploration & Collecting.

Curve is a lesbian magazine published in the United States. It covers news, politics, social issues, and includes celebrity interviews and stories on entertainment, pop culture, style, travel, and a website that hosts an internet forum focusing on lesbian issues, active since 2000.

Question:
Do Tropical Fish Hobbyist and Curve cover the same topic?

Answer:
no

[... other few-shot examples ...]

Context:
{paragraph_a}

{paragraph_b}

Question:
{question}

Answer:
"""
```

This corresponds to [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) in DSPy. 
### Random search over bootstrapped few-shot programs
Now that we have a way to generate prompt templates containing automatically generated few-shot examples. All the random search does it generate a set of candidate programs with shuffled training data and various numbers of few-shot examples, then selects the best performing candidate. This is [BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/random_search.py#L26) in DSPy. 

Simplified descriptions of the algorithms for [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) and [BootstrapFewShotWithRandomSearch](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/random_search.py#L26) are described in [the original DSPy paper](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sY5N0zY5Od) in appendices H.1 and H.2. Further information is also available at [DSPy Optimizers (formerly Teleprompters)](https://dspy.ai/learn/optimization/optimizers/)
## MIPRO

![The MIPRO optimizer](mipro-diagram.png "[The MIPRO optimizer](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695). In Step 1, demonstrations are bootstrapped using the same process from Step 1 of Bootstrap Random Search. In Step 2, instructions are proposed using the grounding strategy described in 3.1. In Step 3, Bayesian optimization is used to find the best performing combination of instruction and demonstration candidates.")

### Bootstrap demonstrations
Run [BootstrapFewShot](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/b1ae7af5261a5201d080b57aea248cd09d76e666/dspy/teleprompt/bootstrap.py#L36) as described in the previous section to get candidate sets of demonstrations. 
### Propose instruction candidates
Using a 'proposer' LLM based program we can generate candidate instructions for $\Phi$. The one used in DSPy looks like:
```python
class GenerateSingleModuleInstruction(dspy.Signature):
    """
    Use the information below to learn about a task that we are trying to solve
    using calls to an LM, then generate a new instruction that will be used to
    prompt a Language Model to better solve the task.
    """

    dataset_description = dspy.InputField(
        desc="A description of the dataset that we are using."
    )
    program_code = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Language model program designed to solve a particular task."
    )
    program_description = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Summary of the task the program is designed to solve, and how it goes about solving it."
    )
    module = dspy.InputField(
        desc="The module to create an instruction for."
    )
    task_demos = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Example inputs/outputs of our module."
    )
    previous_instructions = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Previous instructions we've attempted, along with their associated scores."
    )
    basic_instruction = dspy.InputField(
        desc="Basic instruction."
    )
    tip = dspy.InputField(
        desc="A suggestion for how to go about generating the new instruction."
    )
    proposed_instruction = dspy.OutputField(
        desc="Propose an instruction that will be used to prompt a Language Model to perform this task."
    )
```

The above proposer program will use an LM decide which of the input fields are relevant to include in the output proposed instruction. We can also do this explicitly by only providing a random subset of the input fields. By default, it seems that the [propose_instructions function](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/main/dspy/teleprompt/mipro_optimizer_v2.py#L416) generates diverse instructions by 1) Randomly picking a tip 2) Randomly including previous instructions 3) Temperature is non-zero. The tips mentioned in the [paper in appendix C.2](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) are:
```python
python_tips = {
    "none": "",
    "creative": "Don't be afraid to be creative!",
    "simple": "Keep the instruction clear and concise.",
    "description": "Make sure your instruction is very informative and descriptive.",
    "high_stakes": "The instruction should include a high-stakes scenario in which the LM must solve the task!",
    "persona": "Provide the LM with a persona that is relevant to the task (e.g., 'You are a ...')."
}
```

A personal favorite high stakes scenario I saw when running the code was that the LM was told a nuclear meltdown would occur if it did not solve the task. 

### Search combinations
The result is that we should have for each module a set of diverse instructions and a collection of sets of bootstrapped demonstrations. MIPRO then treats these two parameters as categorical variables for a Bayesian model (a Tree-structured Parzen Estimator, see [this paper for details](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf)) and then picks the best combination of instruction and demonstrations. This is done using [optuna](https://github.com/optuna/optuna)to perform the Bayesian optimization:

```python
sampler = optuna.samplers.TPESampler(seed=seed, multivariate=True)
study = optuna.create_study(direction="maximize", sampler=sampler)
study.optimize(objective, n_trials=num_trials)
```

The [objective function](https://github.com/stanfordnlp/dspy/blob/main/dspy/teleprompt/mipro_optimizer_v2.py#L502) is the the average metric over all data in the training set i.e. $\frac{1}{|\mathcal{D}|} \sum_{(x, x') \in \mathcal{D}} \mu(\Phi_{\mathcal{V} \to S}(x), x')$. Important to note that if $x'$ is not provided, we need to ensure that our metric can still return a score even without a ground truth label. For example, we would need to update the metric described in [Bootstrapping without random search](#bootstrapping-without-random-search) to handle the case where `example.answer` is missing:
```python
def validate_answer(example, pred, trace=None):
	factually_correct = dspy.Predict(AssessFactuality)
	if trace is not None:
		# If we're "bootstrapping"
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=example.answer)
		
	if example.answer is None:
		# If ground truth not provided
		return factually_correct(question=example.question, context=example.context, answer=pred.answer)
		
	return example.answer == pred.answer
```

### MIPRO++
In vanilla MIPRO our Bayesian model has two categorical parameters: 1) An instruction 2) A set of demonstrations. However the MIPRO++ variant suggests instead directly optimizing the  proposal hyperparameters, i.e. to include a given input field or not, as well as the demonstrations. However the authors do not run any experiments with full MIPRO++ rather only the 0-shot variation where they optimize the instruction only. In [section 4.4 of the paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695) they specify which input fields they include which confusingly states one of the variables as "selects a specific set of bootstrapped demos to show to the proposer LM (categorical)". My understanding is these demonstrations are only included to guide the instruction generation LM and are not included in the output. But it is such a natural step to have the including the demonstrations in the output as another categorical variable I am a bit puzzled why the authors do not include this. The code for MIPRO++ (or the 0-shot variant) is not provided anywhere. Very puzzling.

In any case, one interesting side-effect of the 0-shot MIPRO++ approach is it allows us to see the learned importance scores from the Bayesian model e.g Figure 6:
![Learned hyperparameter importances for HotpotQA](hyperparameter-importances.png "[Figure 6: Learned hyperparameter importances for HotpotQA.](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695). Here we see that the set of demonstrations chosen for the meta-prompt were most important for proposal quality.")

## References
1. [Optimizing Instructions and Demonstrations for Multi-Stage Language Model Programs](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.11695)
2. [DSPy: Compiling Declarative Language Model Calls into Self-Improving Pipelines](https://openreview.net/pdf?id=sY5N0zY5Od)
3. [TextGrad: Automatic “Differentiation” via Text](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2406.07496)
4. [Demonstrate–Search–Predict: Composing retrieval and language models for knowledge-intensive NLP](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2212.14024)
5. [DSPy Assertions: Computational Constraints for Self-Refining Language Model Pipelines](https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.13382)
6. [Algorithms for Hyper-Parameter Optimization](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2011/file/86e8f7ab32cfd12577bc2619bc635690-Paper.pdf)
7. [Bayesian Optimization with extensions, applications, and other sundry items](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=C5nqEHpdyoE)
