content/archive/ab-testing/index.md, before:

---
title: "A/B Testing"
date: 2025-05-23T14:37:05+02:00
draft: false
---
{{< katex >}}

A/B testing is a way of comparing two versions of something and deciding which performs better. It is a form of hypothesis testing, where we gather evidence about how our change impacts the metrics we care about. For example, Netflix might test out a new version of their recommendation algorithm and want to decide if it increases the amount of time users spend watching movies. The classical hypothesis testing example however is the randomized control trial.

## Hypothesis Testing

Consider the following scenario:

Researchers have discovered a new miracle drug. They think it has these incredible properties, that if people take it they will live longer, be happier, etc... We want to experimentally verify if this is true, so we formulate two hypotheses:

1. Null hypothesis \\(H_0\\): The drug has no effect.

2. The alternative hypothesis \\(H_1\\): The drug has a positive effect.

We then gather some test subjects, split them into groups A and B, give group B a course of the drug and then measure the outcomes of both groups. Let us assume our outcomes are integers (where higher numbers mean a more positive outcome), we might have the following raw data:

```text
Group A: [48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46]
Group B: [50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51]
```

and our hypotheses are formalized in terms of the average outcome of each group:

1. Null hypothesis \\(H_0\\): \\(\mu_A = \mu_B\\).

2. The alternative hypothesis \\(H_1\\): \\(\mu_B > \mu_A\\)

Did our drug have a positive effect?

Hypothesis testing lets us answer either **Yes! There is an effect** or **We don't have any evidence of an effect**. Formally we can either:

1. **Reject the null hypothesis**: With high probability we think the drug has an effect.

2. **Fail to reject the null hypothesis**: We don't have enough evidence to claim the drug has an effect.

We cannot answer **Nope, no effect**, as it may be that we had insufficient data to detect a difference, or just got unlucky due to random chance. If we take the analogy of a murder trial. \\(H_0\\) is an innocent verdict, \\(H_1\\) is a guilty verdict. We can either find a defendant guilty (reject \\(H_0\\)) or we find them innocent (fail to reject \\(H_0\\)). But note that finding someone innocent occurs if we fail to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt. It is not a question of "proving innocence" (accepting \\(H_0\\)) but rather failing to prove guilt.

In this experiment we have 10 test subjects in each group. Is this enough to be confident about our decision?

## Sample size

Before running an experiment we need to decide how many samples we are going to collect. Intuitively, the more samples we collect the more confident we will be about our conclusion. However we are usually constrained by a combination of time or money, and so want to pick enough samples such that we are confident enough. Therefore we need to determine the following parameters:

1. Minimum expected effect size
2. Tolerance for false positives
3. Tolerance for false negatives.

The minimum effect size is what is the smallest absolute difference in results \\(\delta\\) that we would care about. E.g. in our drug trial example, we might want to see at least a 5 year increase in lifespan, otherwise we would consider the effect too small to be worth the price of the drug.

The tolerance for false positives / negatives means what probability of a false positive or false negative are we willing to accept. The significance level \\(\alpha\\) is acceptable probability of a false positive. The power is \\(1-\beta\\) where \\(\beta\\) is the acceptable probability of a false negative. Again coming back to our drug trial example, if we have \\(\alpha = 5\\)% and \\(\beta = 20\\)% (so power of 80%) then we are willing to tolerate a 1 in 5 chance that we claim an ineffectual drug has an effect, and a 1 in 20 chance that we fail to detect that a drug improves outcomes.

I find thinking in terms of tolerance levels of adverse outcomes more helpful than thinking in terms of decision tables, but I provide them below for completeness:

| | Reject \\(H_0\\) | Fail to reject \\(H_0\\) |
|:---|:---|:---|
| \\(H_0\\) is True | False Positive | True Positive |
| \\(H_0\\) is False | True Negative | False Negative |

The same information can be expressed in terms of probabilities:

| | Probability to reject \\(H_0\\) | Probability fail to reject \\(H_0\\) |
|:---|:---|:---|
| \\(H_0\\) is True | \\(\alpha\\) | \\(1-\alpha\\) |
| \\(H_0\\) is False | \\(1-\beta\\) | \\(\beta\\) |

Lets assume we have picked all three of these parameters. The last piece of information we need is whether the alternative hypothesis is directional. For example, `the drug has a positive effect` is directional while `the drug has an effect` is not. This matters as we will need to adjust our significance level accordingly, as there are twice as many ways to get a false positive for a non-directional null-hypothesis than a directional one. Hence to maintain our desired false positive rate of \\(\alpha\\), we use the stricter rate of \\(\alpha / 2\\) in our sample size calculation below.

Given all this information, the paper [So you want to run an experiment, now what? Some Simple Rules of Thumb for Optimal Experimental Design.](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w15701/w15701.pdf) explains how to pick the number of samples \\(n\\) per group in section 3.1:

$$
n = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta})^2 \cdot (\sigma_A^2 + \sigma_B^2) \cdot \frac{1}{\delta^{2}}
$$

where \\(\sigma_A\\), \\(\sigma_B\\) are the standard deviations of groups A and B, and \\(z_{\alpha}\\) is the z-score of \\(\alpha\\) i.e. the solution to the equation

$$
P(Z > z_{\alpha}) = \alpha
$$

where \\(Z\\) is the standard normal. In words \\(z_{\alpha}\\) is the point where we expect a \\(\alpha\\) chance of a data point drawn from \\(Z\\) being larger than this value. In python this can be implemented as:

```python
from scipy.stats import norm

alpha = 0.05 # 5%
z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
```

This formula assumes we have the same number of samples \\(n\\) per group, however we often have that the treatment group B is smaller than the control group A. We therefore would also need to pick the ratio of samples per group, let \\(\pi_A\\) denote the ratio of samples assigned to group A (such that \\(\pi_A + \pi_B = 1\\)), then our formula for the total number of required samples becomes:

$$
n = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta})^2 \cdot \left( \frac{\sigma_A^2}{\pi_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{\pi_B} \right) \cdot \frac{1}{\delta^{2}}
$$

which we would allocate according to our ratios \\(\pi_A\\) and \\(\pi_B\\).

Lastly, if we have not yet run our experiment how can we know the standard deviations \\(\sigma_A\\), \\(\sigma_B\\)? Well we would either need to estimate it empirically e.g. \\(\hat{\mu} = \frac{1}{N} \sum x_i\\) and \\(\hat{\sigma} = \frac{1}{N} \sum (\hat{\mu} - x_i)^2\\) based on some baseline results and extrapolate to the treatment group. Or if we are dealing with [Bernoulli random variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli_distribution) we know  \\(\sigma^2 = \mu \cdot (1-\mu)\\), so we only need to estimate the baseline mean \\(\mu_A\\) and can then set the treatment mean to \\(\mu_B = \mu_A + \delta\\). Adapting code from [A/B testing and the Z-test](https://bytepawn.com/ab-testing-and-the-ztest.html) we can calculate the necessary sample size in Python:

```python
import math
from scipy.stats import norm

def minimum_num_samples(var_A, var_B, pi_A, delta, alpha, power, one_sided):
    """Calculate the minimum total number of samples to achieve desired confidence levels.

    Args:
        var_A (float): The baseline variance.
        var_B (float): The treatment variance.
        pi_A (float): The ratio of samples assigned to the baseline.
        delta (float): The absolute minimum detectable effect size.
        alpha (float): The significance level.
        power (float): The power of the test.
        one_sided (bool): Whether the alternative hypothesis is directional.
    """
    if one_sided:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
    else:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha / 2)
  
    z_power  = norm.ppf(power)
    pi_B = 1 - pi_A 
    N = ((z_alpha + z_power) ** 2) * (var_A/pi_A + var_B/pi_B) / (delta) ** 2 
    return math.ceil(N)
```

In practice you do not need to write this code from scratch as you can either use an online calculator like [Evan Miller Sample Size Calculator](https://www.evanmiller.org/ab-testing/sample-size.html) or an open source solution like [GoDaddy maintained Python package](https://github.com/godaddy/sample-size).

## p-values and Statistical Significance

Lets say we picked an appropriate the number of samples, ran the experiment and we got some data that looks like this:

```text
Group A: [48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46]
Group B: [50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51]
```

We now come back the the question we are hoping to answer: Did our drug have a positive effect?

To perform a hypothesis test, we need to do two things:

1. Choose a test statistic that summarizes our data as a single number. Model the distribution of the test statistic under the assumption that \\(H_0\\) is true.

2. Compute how likely it is that our samples were generated under \\(H_0\\). This is our p-value.

Recall that our null hypothesis is the means are the same for both groups \\(\mu_A = \mu_B\\), and the alternative hypothesis that the mean of group B is larger \\(\mu_B > \mu_A\\).

According to the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) the sample distribution of the mean converges to a normal distribution as \\(n \to \infty\\). So per the CLT, we can model the difference in sample means as:

$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(\mu_B - \mu_A, \frac{\sigma_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{n_B})
$$

where \\(\mu_A, \mu_B\\) and and \\(\sigma_A^2, \sigma_B^2\\) are the true means and variances and \\(\hat{\mu}_A,\hat{\mu}_B\\) are the sample means. Under the null hypothesis \\(\mu_B - \mu_A = 0\\), so our distribution becomes:

$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \frac{\sigma_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{n_B})
$$

and as the true variances are not known, we estimate them empirically:
$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B})
$$

The last step is to decide on a test statistic, we could just pick the left hand side from the above equation as is, but it is common to first standardize to:
$$
\frac{\mu_B - \mu_A}{\sqrt{\frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B}}} \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)
$$

We now have a model of our test statistic under the null hypothesis, and the value of the test statistic \\(\hat{z}\\) according to our data is given by plugging the empirical means into the above equation to get:

$$
\hat{z} = \frac{\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A}{\sqrt{\frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B}}}
$$

This completes the first step, see [The art of A/B testing](https://archive.ph/8Bp8p) for more details on the derivation. Step two is to determine the p-value of the test statistic. The p-value is a measure of how surprising our result is under the null hypothesis. A low p-value means our result is very unexpected, and suggests that our null hypothesis may not be correct. In general, the p-value is:

$$
\text{p-value} = P(\text{Test statistic is as or more extreme than observed} \mid H_0)
$$

for our given test statistic and alternate hypothesis this is:

$$
\text{p-value} = P(Z \geq \hat{z})
$$

Note that if our alternative hypothesis was instead two-sided, as in \\(\mu_B \neq \mu_A\\), the p-value would instead be \\(P(|Z| \geq |\hat{z}|)\\).

For our hypothesis test we would compute the p-value in Python as follows (adapted from [A/B testing and the Z-test](https://bytepawn.com/ab-testing-and-the-ztest.html)):

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy.stats import norm


def z_to_p(z, one_sided):
    p = 1 - norm.cdf(z)
    if one_sided:
        return p
    else:
        return 2*p


A = np.array([48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46])
B = np.array([50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51])
N = 10

alpha = 0.05

mu_A = np.mean(A)
mu_B = np.mean(B)

var_A = np.var(A)
var_B = np.var(B)

z_hat = (mu_B - mu_A) / np.sqrt((var_A + var_B) / N)

p = z_to_p(z_hat, one_sided=True)

print('Empirical mean for A: %.3f' % mu_A)
print('Empirical mean for B: %.3f' % mu_B)

print('p-value: %.3f' % p)
if p <= alpha:
    print("""The miracle drug works!""")
else:
    print("""We're not sure if the drug works.""")

>>> "Empirical mean for A: 48.800"
>>> "Empirical mean for B: 50.300"
>>> "p-value: 0.007"
>>> "The miracle drug works!"
```

Good news right? The p-value is less than our significance level, so we have a statistically significant difference right?

Well... the way I created this data was by sampling 20 times from \\(\mathcal{N}(50, 2)\\), splitting the data in half and then setting group B to the split with larger mean. So if the samples are all drawn from the same distribution why are we getting a statistically significant result?

### Minimum detectable effect

If we go back to the paper [So you want to run an experiment, now what? Some Simple Rules of Thumb for Optimal Experimental Design.](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w15701/w15701.pdf) We can determine how large of an effect can be detected given the current sample size:

$$
\delta = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta}) \cdot \sqrt{\frac{\sigma_A^2}{\pi_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{\pi_B}}
$$

In Python this looks like:

```python
from scipy.stats import norm

def minimum_detectable_effect_size(var_A, var_B, n_A, n_B, alpha, power, one_sided):
    """Calculate the minimum detectable effect size.

    Returns the absolute difference between the two means that is detectable
    with the given parameters.

    Args:
        var_A (float): The baseline variance.
        var_B (float): The treatment variance. 
        n_A (int): The number of samples in the first experiment.
        n_B (int): The number of samples in the second experiment.
        alpha (float): The false positive rate we are willing to accept.
        power (float): (1-power) is the false negative rate we are willing to accept.
        one_sided (bool): Whether the alternative hypothesis is directional.

    Returns:
        float: The minimum detectable effect size.
    """
    if one_sided:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
    else:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha / 2)

    z_power = norm.ppf(power)
    

    delta = (z_alpha + z_power) * math.sqrt(var_A / n_A + var_B / n_B)
    return delta
```

and if we run this function on our data:

```python
A = np.array([48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46])
B = np.array([50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51])
N = 10

alpha = 0.05
power = 0.8

var_A = np.var(A)
var_B = np.var(B)

min_delta = minimum_detectable_effect_size(mu_A, mu_B, N, N, alpha, power, one_sided=True)
min_delta = minimum_detectable_effect_size(var_A, var_B, N, N, alpha, power, one_sided=True) 

print(f"Minimum detectable effect size: {min_delta:.2f}")
print(f"Actual effect size: {mu_B - mu_A:.2f}")

>>> "Minimum detectable effect size: 1.53"
>>> "Actual effect size: 1.50"
```

So it seems that we selected too small of a sample size, hence the results of our hypothesis test are not valid. Indeed if we run our sample size calculation function we see that for our desired confidence levels we should have used `74` samples to detect a minimum effect on the order of a `1` absolute increase in mean.

```python
min_delta = 1
n_samples = minimum_num_samples(var_A, var_A, 0.5, min_delta, alpha, power, one_sided=True)
print(f"Minimum number of samples: {n_samples}")

>>> "Minimum number of samples: 74"
```

### Early Stopping

<!-- TODO: How to avoid invalidating statistical significance by stopping experiments early or peeking at results. https://www.evanmiller.org/how-not-to-run-an-ab-test.html -->

{{< reflist >}}

<!-- Relevant links:

- [Monte Carlo Power Analysis](https://deliveroo.engineering/2018/12/07/monte-carlo-power-analysis.html)
- [The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Monte Carlo Simulations in A/B Testing](https://bytepawn.com/unreasonable-effectiveness-monte-carlo-ab-testing.html)
- [Building intuition for p-values and statistical significance](https://bytepawn.com/building-intuition-p-values-statistical-significance.html#building-intuition-p-values-statistical-significance)
- [Beautiful A/B testing](https://bytepawn.com/beautiful-ab-testing.html#beautiful-ab-testing) -->

Commit message:

Add stub early stopping section.

content/archive/ab-testing/index.md, after:

---
title: "A/B Testing"
date: 2025-05-23T14:37:05+02:00
draft: false
---
{{< katex >}}

A/B testing is a way of comparing two versions of something and deciding which performs better. It is a form of hypothesis testing, where we gather evidence about how our change impacts the metrics we care about. For example, Netflix might test out a new version of their recommendation algorithm and want to decide if it increases the amount of time users spend watching movies. The classical hypothesis testing example however is the randomized control trial.

## Hypothesis Testing

Consider the following scenario:

Researchers have discovered a new miracle drug. They think it has these incredible properties, that if people take it they will live longer, be happier, etc... We want to experimentally verify if this is true, so we formulate two hypotheses:

1. Null hypothesis \\(H_0\\): The drug has no effect.

2. The alternative hypothesis \\(H_1\\): The drug has a positive effect.

We then gather some test subjects, split them into groups A and B, give group B a course of the drug and then measure the outcomes of both groups. Let us assume our outcomes are integers (where higher numbers mean a more positive outcome), we might have the following raw data:

```text
Group A: [48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46]
Group B: [50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51]
```

and our hypotheses are formalized in terms of the average outcome of each group:

1. Null hypothesis \\(H_0\\): \\(\mu_A = \mu_B\\).

2. The alternative hypothesis \\(H_1\\): \\(\mu_B > \mu_A\\)

Did our drug have a positive effect?

Hypothesis testing lets us answer either **Yes! There is an effect** or **We don't have any evidence of an effect**. Formally we can either:

1. **Reject the null hypothesis**: With high probability we think the drug has an effect.

2. **Fail to reject the null hypothesis**: We don't have enough evidence to claim the drug has an effect.

We cannot answer **Nope, no effect**, as it may be that we had insufficient data to detect a difference, or just got unlucky due to random chance. If we take the analogy of a murder trial. \\(H_0\\) is an innocent verdict, \\(H_1\\) is a guilty verdict. We can either find a defendant guilty (reject \\(H_0\\)) or we find them innocent (fail to reject \\(H_0\\)). But note that finding someone innocent occurs if we fail to prove guilt beyond reasonable doubt. It is not a question of "proving innocence" (accepting \\(H_0\\)) but rather failing to prove guilt.

In this experiment we have 10 test subjects in each group. Is this enough to be confident about our decision?

## Sample size

Before running an experiment we need to decide how many samples we are going to collect. Intuitively, the more samples we collect the more confident we will be about our conclusion. However we are usually constrained by a combination of time or money, and so want to pick enough samples such that we are confident enough. Therefore we need to determine the following parameters:

1. Minimum expected effect size
2. Tolerance for false positives
3. Tolerance for false negatives.

The minimum effect size is what is the smallest absolute difference in results \\(\delta\\) that we would care about. E.g. in our drug trial example, we might want to see at least a 5 year increase in lifespan, otherwise we would consider the effect too small to be worth the price of the drug.

The tolerance for false positives / negatives means what probability of a false positive or false negative are we willing to accept. The significance level \\(\alpha\\) is acceptable probability of a false positive. The power is \\(1-\beta\\) where \\(\beta\\) is the acceptable probability of a false negative. Again coming back to our drug trial example, if we have \\(\alpha = 5\\)% and \\(\beta = 20\\)% (so power of 80%) then we are willing to tolerate a 1 in 5 chance that we claim an ineffectual drug has an effect, and a 1 in 20 chance that we fail to detect that a drug improves outcomes.

I find thinking in terms of tolerance levels of adverse outcomes more helpful than thinking in terms of decision tables, but I provide them below for completeness:

| | Reject \\(H_0\\) | Fail to reject \\(H_0\\) |
|:---|:---|:---|
| \\(H_0\\) is True | False Positive | True Positive |
| \\(H_0\\) is False | True Negative | False Negative |

The same information can be expressed in terms of probabilities:

| | Probability to reject \\(H_0\\) | Probability fail to reject \\(H_0\\) |
|:---|:---|:---|
| \\(H_0\\) is True | \\(\alpha\\) | \\(1-\alpha\\) |
| \\(H_0\\) is False | \\(1-\beta\\) | \\(\beta\\) |

Lets assume we have picked all three of these parameters. The last piece of information we need is whether the alternative hypothesis is directional. For example, `the drug has a positive effect` is directional while `the drug has an effect` is not. This matters as we will need to adjust our significance level accordingly, as there are twice as many ways to get a false positive for a non-directional null-hypothesis than a directional one. Hence to maintain our desired false positive rate of \\(\alpha\\), we use the stricter rate of \\(\alpha / 2\\) in our sample size calculation below.

Given all this information, the paper [So you want to run an experiment, now what? Some Simple Rules of Thumb for Optimal Experimental Design.](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w15701/w15701.pdf) explains how to pick the number of samples \\(n\\) per group in section 3.1:

$$
n = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta})^2 \cdot (\sigma_A^2 + \sigma_B^2) \cdot \frac{1}{\delta^{2}}
$$

where \\(\sigma_A\\), \\(\sigma_B\\) are the standard deviations of groups A and B, and \\(z_{\alpha}\\) is the z-score of \\(\alpha\\) i.e. the solution to the equation

$$
P(Z > z_{\alpha}) = \alpha
$$

where \\(Z\\) is the standard normal. In words \\(z_{\alpha}\\) is the point where we expect a \\(\alpha\\) chance of a data point drawn from \\(Z\\) being larger than this value. In python this can be implemented as:

```python
from scipy.stats import norm

alpha = 0.05 # 5%
z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
```

This formula assumes we have the same number of samples \\(n\\) per group, however we often have that the treatment group B is smaller than the control group A. We therefore would also need to pick the ratio of samples per group, let \\(\pi_A\\) denote the ratio of samples assigned to group A (such that \\(\pi_A + \pi_B = 1\\)), then our formula for the total number of required samples becomes:

$$
n = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta})^2 \cdot \left( \frac{\sigma_A^2}{\pi_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{\pi_B} \right) \cdot \frac{1}{\delta^{2}}
$$

which we would allocate according to our ratios \\(\pi_A\\) and \\(\pi_B\\).

Lastly, if we have not yet run our experiment how can we know the standard deviations \\(\sigma_A\\), \\(\sigma_B\\)? Well we would either need to estimate it empirically e.g. \\(\hat{\mu} = \frac{1}{N} \sum x_i\\) and \\(\hat{\sigma} = \frac{1}{N} \sum (\hat{\mu} - x_i)^2\\) based on some baseline results and extrapolate to the treatment group. Or if we are dealing with [Bernoulli random variables](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bernoulli_distribution) we know  \\(\sigma^2 = \mu \cdot (1-\mu)\\), so we only need to estimate the baseline mean \\(\mu_A\\) and can then set the treatment mean to \\(\mu_B = \mu_A + \delta\\). Adapting code from [A/B testing and the Z-test](https://bytepawn.com/ab-testing-and-the-ztest.html) we can calculate the necessary sample size in Python:

```python
import math
from scipy.stats import norm

def minimum_num_samples(var_A, var_B, pi_A, delta, alpha, power, one_sided):
    """Calculate the minimum total number of samples to achieve desired confidence levels.

    Args:
        var_A (float): The baseline variance.
        var_B (float): The treatment variance.
        pi_A (float): The ratio of samples assigned to the baseline.
        delta (float): The absolute minimum detectable effect size.
        alpha (float): The significance level.
        power (float): The power of the test.
        one_sided (bool): Whether the alternative hypothesis is directional.
    """
    if one_sided:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
    else:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha / 2)
  
    z_power  = norm.ppf(power)
    pi_B = 1 - pi_A 
    N = ((z_alpha + z_power) ** 2) * (var_A/pi_A + var_B/pi_B) / (delta) ** 2 
    return math.ceil(N)
```

In practice you do not need to write this code from scratch as you can either use an online calculator like [Evan Miller Sample Size Calculator](https://www.evanmiller.org/ab-testing/sample-size.html) or an open source solution like [GoDaddy sample-size Python package](https://github.com/godaddy/sample-size).

## p-values and Statistical Significance

Lets say we picked an appropriate the number of samples, ran the experiment and we got some data that looks like this:

```text
Group A: [48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46]
Group B: [50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51]
```

We now come back the the question we are hoping to answer: Did our drug have a positive effect?

To perform a hypothesis test, we need to do two things:

1. Choose a test statistic that summarizes our data as a single number. Model the distribution of the test statistic under the assumption that \\(H_0\\) is true.

2. Compute how likely it is that our samples were generated under \\(H_0\\). This is our p-value.

Recall that our null hypothesis is the means are the same for both groups \\(\mu_A = \mu_B\\), and the alternative hypothesis that the mean of group B is larger \\(\mu_B > \mu_A\\).

According to the Central Limit Theorem (CLT) the sample distribution of the mean converges to a normal distribution as \\(n \to \infty\\). So per the CLT, we can model the difference in sample means as:

$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(\mu_B - \mu_A, \frac{\sigma_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{n_B})
$$

where \\(\mu_A, \mu_B\\) and and \\(\sigma_A^2, \sigma_B^2\\) are the true means and variances and \\(\hat{\mu}_A,\hat{\mu}_B\\) are the sample means. Under the null hypothesis \\(\mu_B - \mu_A = 0\\), so our distribution becomes:

$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \frac{\sigma_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{n_B})
$$

and as the true variances are not known, we estimate them empirically:
$$
\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A \sim \mathcal{N}(0, \frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B})
$$

The last step is to decide on a test statistic, we could just pick the left hand side from the above equation as is, but it is common to first standardize to:
$$
\frac{\mu_B - \mu_A}{\sqrt{\frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B}}} \sim \mathcal{N}(0, 1)
$$

We now have a model of our test statistic under the null hypothesis, and the value of the test statistic \\(\hat{z}\\) according to our data is given by plugging the empirical means into the above equation to get:

$$
\hat{z} = \frac{\hat{\mu}_B - \hat{\mu}_A}{\sqrt{\frac{\hat{\sigma}_A^2}{n_A} + \frac{\hat{\sigma}_B^2}{n_B}}}
$$

This completes the first step, see [The art of A/B testing](https://archive.ph/8Bp8p) for more details on the derivation. Step two is to determine the p-value of the test statistic. The p-value is a measure of how surprising our result is under the null hypothesis. A low p-value means our result is very unexpected, and suggests that our null hypothesis may not be correct. In general, the p-value is:

$$
\text{p-value} = P(\text{Test statistic is as or more extreme than observed} \mid H_0)
$$

for our given test statistic and alternate hypothesis this is:

$$
\text{p-value} = P(Z \geq \hat{z})
$$

Note that if our alternative hypothesis was instead two-sided, as in \\(\mu_B \neq \mu_A\\), the p-value would instead be \\(P(|Z| \geq |\hat{z}|)\\).

For our hypothesis test we would compute the p-value in Python as follows (adapted from [A/B testing and the Z-test](https://bytepawn.com/ab-testing-and-the-ztest.html)):

```python
import numpy as np
from scipy.stats import norm


def z_to_p(z, one_sided):
    p = 1 - norm.cdf(z)
    if one_sided:
        return p
    else:
        return 2*p


A = np.array([48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46])
B = np.array([50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51])
N = 10

alpha = 0.05

mu_A = np.mean(A)
mu_B = np.mean(B)

var_A = np.var(A)
var_B = np.var(B)

z_hat = (mu_B - mu_A) / np.sqrt((var_A + var_B) / N)

p = z_to_p(z_hat, one_sided=True)

print('Empirical mean for A: %.3f' % mu_A)
print('Empirical mean for B: %.3f' % mu_B)

print('p-value: %.3f' % p)
if p <= alpha:
    print("""The miracle drug works!""")
else:
    print("""We're not sure if the drug works.""")

>>> "Empirical mean for A: 48.800"
>>> "Empirical mean for B: 50.300"
>>> "p-value: 0.007"
>>> "The miracle drug works!"
```

Good news right? The p-value is less than our significance level, so we have a statistically significant difference right?

Well... the way I created this data was by sampling 20 times from \\(\mathcal{N}(50, 2)\\), splitting the data in half and then setting group B to the split with larger mean. So if the samples are all drawn from the same distribution why are we getting a statistically significant result?

### Minimum detectable effect

If we go back to the paper [So you want to run an experiment, now what? Some Simple Rules of Thumb for Optimal Experimental Design.](https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w15701/w15701.pdf) We can determine how large of an effect can be detected given the current sample size:

$$
\delta = (z_{\alpha} + z_{\beta}) \cdot \sqrt{\frac{\sigma_A^2}{\pi_A} + \frac{\sigma_B^2}{\pi_B}}
$$

In Python this looks like:

```python
from scipy.stats import norm

def minimum_detectable_effect_size(var_A, var_B, n_A, n_B, alpha, power, one_sided):
    """Calculate the minimum detectable effect size.

    Returns the absolute difference between the two means that is detectable
    with the given parameters.

    Args:
        var_A (float): The baseline variance.
        var_B (float): The treatment variance. 
        n_A (int): The number of samples in the first experiment.
        n_B (int): The number of samples in the second experiment.
        alpha (float): The false positive rate we are willing to accept.
        power (float): (1-power) is the false negative rate we are willing to accept.
        one_sided (bool): Whether the alternative hypothesis is directional.

    Returns:
        float: The minimum detectable effect size.
    """
    if one_sided:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha)
    else:
        z_alpha = norm.ppf(1 - alpha / 2)

    z_power = norm.ppf(power)
    

    delta = (z_alpha + z_power) * math.sqrt(var_A / n_A + var_B / n_B)
    return delta
```

and if we run this function on our data:

```python
A = np.array([48, 48, 48, 48, 51, 51, 47, 50, 51, 46])
B = np.array([50, 51, 50, 49, 50, 49, 50, 52, 51, 51])
N = 10

alpha = 0.05
power = 0.8

var_A = np.var(A)
var_B = np.var(B)

min_delta = minimum_detectable_effect_size(mu_A, mu_B, N, N, alpha, power, one_sided=True)
min_delta = minimum_detectable_effect_size(var_A, var_B, N, N, alpha, power, one_sided=True) 

print(f"Minimum detectable effect size: {min_delta:.2f}")
print(f"Actual effect size: {mu_B - mu_A:.2f}")

>>> "Minimum detectable effect size: 1.53"
>>> "Actual effect size: 1.50"
```

So it seems that we selected too small of a sample size, hence the results of our hypothesis test are not valid. Indeed if we run our sample size calculation function we see that for our desired confidence levels we should have used `74` samples to detect a minimum effect on the order of a `1` absolute increase in mean.

```python
min_delta = 1
n_samples = minimum_num_samples(var_A, var_A, 0.5, min_delta, alpha, power, one_sided=True)
print(f"Minimum number of samples: {n_samples}")

>>> "Minimum number of samples: 74"
```

### Early Stopping

TODO: Explain problem of peeking at the data and point to [Simple Sequential A/B Testing](https://www.evanmiller.org/sequential-ab-testing.html)

TODO: How to avoid invalidating statistical significance by stopping experiments early or peeking at results. [How Not To Run an A/B Test](https://www.evanmiller.org/how-not-to-run-an-ab-test.html).

{{< reflist >}}

<!-- Relevant links:

- [Monte Carlo Power Analysis](https://deliveroo.engineering/2018/12/07/monte-carlo-power-analysis.html)
- [The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Monte Carlo Simulations in A/B Testing](https://bytepawn.com/unreasonable-effectiveness-monte-carlo-ab-testing.html)
- [Building intuition for p-values and statistical significance](https://bytepawn.com/building-intuition-p-values-statistical-significance.html#building-intuition-p-values-statistical-significance)
- [Beautiful A/B testing](https://bytepawn.com/beautiful-ab-testing.html#beautiful-ab-testing) -->
