content/archive/dsa.md, before:

---
title: "Data Structures and Algorithms"
date: 2025-04-08T11:05:46+02:00
draft: false
---
{{< katex >}}

## Data Structures

<!-- 1. Knowing the time and space complexity of each.

2. Knowing how to implement them.

3. Most importantly, knowing how to use them in your programming language of choice. -->

Reference for [time-complexity of list, queue and set in python](https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity).

### Lists

Take two lists `a = [1, 3, 2]` and `b = [200, 300, 100]`.

#### Sorting

```python
>>> sorted(a)
[1, 2, 3]
>>> sorted(a, reverse=True)
[3, 2, 1]
>>> sorted(zip(a, b))
[(1, 200), (2, 100), (3, 300)]
>>> sorted(zip(a, b), key=lambda x: x[1])
[(2, 100), (1, 200), (3, 300)]
```

#### Slicing

The slicing operation for lists is identical to for strings, see [String slicing](#string-slicing). An important note is that slicing creates a shallow copy of the list. See [the docs](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists) for more information.

Common slicing operations for list are:

```python
>>> a[::-1] # Reversing a list
[2, 3, 1]
>>> c = a[:] # Shallow copy list
>>> c[0] = -1
>>> a
[1, 3, 2]
>>> c
[-1, 3, 2]
```

### range()

The function has the form `range(start, stop, step)`, see [docs](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#range). We go from start with increment step until the next step would exceed (or be less than for negative step) stop. Examples:

```python
>>> list(range(0, 10, 2))
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
>>> list(range(0, 10, 6))
[0, 6]
>>> list(range(5, 0, -1))
[5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
```

### String slicing

Similar to range for a string `s` we have `s[start:stop]` that goes includes the start element but not the stop element. Examples:

```python
>>> s = "012345"
>>> s[0:2]
"01"
>>> s[1:4]
"123"
>>> s[3:]
"345"
>>> s[:5]
"01234"
```

Can optionally include a `step` i.e. `s[start:stop:step]` which increments the index by step each time. Examples:

```python
>>> s = "012345"
>>> s[1:4:2]
"13"
>>> s[::2]
"024"
```

### Dynamic Arrays

Implememted as `list` in Python.

| Operation | Python | Time Complexity |
|-----------|---------|-----------------|
| Create empty list | `lst = []` | O(1) |
| Create list with items | `lst = [1,2,3]` | O(n) |
| Append item | `lst.append('a')` | O(1) |
| Delete by index | `del lst[0]` | O(n) |
| Remove first occurrence | `lst.remove(x)` | O(n) |
| Check if element exists | `x in lst` | O(n) |
| Pop last item | `lst.pop()` | O(1) |
| Pop item at index | `lst.pop(i)` | O(n) |

### Linked Lists

TODO

### Stacks

Stacks are LIFO (Last In, First Out). Implemented as lists, do `push(), pop()` using `append(), pop()`.

```python
stack = []

stack.append(1) # stack = [1]
stack.append(2) # stack = [1, 2]

stack.pop()  # 2, stack = [1]

top = stack[-1] # 1, stack = [1]
```

Note that as `deque` is a double-ended queue, we can add/remove from both ends in \\(O(1)\\) time. So we can also implement a stack as:

```python
from collections import deque

stack = deque()

stack.append(1) # stack = deque([1])
stack.append(2) # stack = deque([1, 2])

top_item = stack.pop() # 2, stack = deque([1])

top = stack[-1] # 1, stack = deque([1])
```

### Queues

Queues are FIFO (First In, First Out). Use `deque` implementation from `collections`, do `push(), pop()` using `append(), popleft()`.

```python
from collections import deque

queue = deque()

queue.append(1) # queue = deque([1])
queue.append(2) # queue = deque([1, 2])

queue.popleft()  # 1, queue = deque([2])
```

### Binary Trees

TODO

### Hash Maps / Sets

TODO

### Heaps

TODO

### Graphs

TODO

## Algorithms

### Backtracking

General backtracking algorithm is the following:

```python
def backtrack(state):
    if is_goal(state):
        record_solution(state)
        return

    for choice in choices(state):
        if is_valid(choice, state):
            make_choice(choice, state)
            backtrack(state)
            undo_choice(choice, state)
```

**Time & Space Complexity:**

- `n`: Depth of recursion / number of decisions
- `b`: Branching factor (choices per step)

**Time Complexity  \\(O(b^n)\\):**

In the worst case, we explore all possible combinations of `b` choices at `n` levels:

```text
Level 0:        1 call
Level 1:        b calls
Level 2:        b^2 calls
…
Level n:        b^n calls
```

So in total we have \\(1 + b + b^2 + \dots + b^n\\). This is the sum of a geometric series which equals  \\(\frac{b^{n+1} - 1}{b - 1} = O(b^n)\\)

**Space Complexity \\(O(n)\\):**

The space required during execution is made up of the call stack and the current state. The call stack has size \\(O(n)\\) as it is can be up to the size of the maximum recursion depth. The size of the state depends on the specifics of the problem, but it is also usually of size \\(O(n)\\). This gives the total space complexity of \\(O(n)\\).

### Bucket Sort

This algorithm is useful for problems where we want to get the \\(k\\) most frequent elements in a list.

**Examples:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,2,2,3,3,3], k = 2

Output: [2,3]
```

```text
Input: nums = [7,7], k = 1

Output: [7]
```

```text
Input: nums = [4,1,-1,2,-1,2,3], k = 2

Output: [-1,2]
```

**Code:**

```python
from collections import Counter, defaultdict

def top_k_elements(nums: List[int], k: int)-> List[int]:
        n = len(nums)
        counts = Counter(nums)
        buckets = defaultdict(list)
        for num, count in counts.items():
            buckets[count].append(num)

        res = []
        for count in range(n, 0, -1):
            if k == 0:
                break
    
            if count in buckets:
                res.extend(buckets[count])
                k -= len(buckets[count])
        return res
```

If we take the example input `nums = [4,1,-1,2,-1,2,3], k = 2` then we have that:

```python
counts = {4: 1, 1: 1, -1: 2, 2: 2, 3:1}
buckets = {1: [1, 3, 4], 2: [-1, 2]}
```

The intuition is that the buckets contain the count as the key, and a list of elements with that count as the value. Creating the counts and buckets hash maps only takes \\(O(n)\\) time. We also will not use more than \\(O(n)\\) space as the largest key of the buckets dict is \\(n\\) if all elements in nums are the same, and all other keys are less than this value. All values of the buckets dict are just elements of nums, so we also cannot be larger than \\(O(n)\\) space due to the values of the buckets dict. Given the buckets dict, we can now get the top \\(k\\) elements by starting with the highest possible count and in decreasing order of counts, adding elements to our resulting list until we have \\(k\\) elements.

**Time & Space Complexity:**

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(n)\\)

### Prefix sums

Given an integer array `nums`, return an array output where `output[i]` is the product of all the elements of `nums` except `nums[i]`. The idea is to build two arrays of prefix / suffix products as the constraint is usually that you cannot take the product of all elements in `nums` as it is not guaranteed to fit into a 32-bit int.

**Examples:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,2,4,6]

Output: [48,24,12,8]
```

```text
Input: nums = [-1,0,1,2,3]

Output: [0,-6,0,0,0]
```

**Code:**

```python
def product_except_self(nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
    n = len(nums)

    prefix = [1] * n
    for i in range(1, n):
        prefix[i] = nums[i-1] * prefix[i-1] 

    suffix = [1] * n
    for i in range(n-2, -1, -1):
        suffix[i] = nums[i+1] * suffix[i+1]

    res = []
    for i in range(n):
        res.append(prefix[i] * suffix[i])
    return res
```

This has Time & Space Complexity:

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(n)\\)

We can further reduce the space complexity by building the result in place:

```python
def product_except_self(nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
    n = len(nums)
    res = [1] * n

    prefix = 1
    for i in range(1, n):
        prefix = nums[i-1] * prefix
        res[i] *= prefix

    suffix = 1
    for i in range(n-2, -1, -1):
        suffix = nums[i+1] * suffix
        res[i] *= suffix

    return res
```

This would then have Time & Space Complexity:

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(1)\\) (as typically input / output are not counted in space complexity analysis, so we get to ignore the \\(O(n)\\) sized output array we use).

Commit message:

Add binary search algorithm section.

content/archive/dsa.md, after:

---
title: "Data Structures and Algorithms"
date: 2025-04-08T11:05:46+02:00
draft: false
---
{{< katex >}}

## Data Structures

<!-- 1. Knowing the time and space complexity of each.

2. Knowing how to implement them.

3. Most importantly, knowing how to use them in your programming language of choice. -->

Reference for [time-complexity of list, queue and set in python](https://wiki.python.org/moin/TimeComplexity).

### Lists

Take two lists `a = [1, 3, 2]` and `b = [200, 300, 100]`.

#### Sorting

```python
>>> sorted(a)
[1, 2, 3]
>>> sorted(a, reverse=True)
[3, 2, 1]
>>> sorted(zip(a, b))
[(1, 200), (2, 100), (3, 300)]
>>> sorted(zip(a, b), key=lambda x: x[1])
[(2, 100), (1, 200), (3, 300)]
```

#### Slicing

The slicing operation for lists is identical to for strings, see [String slicing](#string-slicing). An important note is that slicing creates a shallow copy of the list. See [the docs](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/datastructures.html#more-on-lists) for more information.

Common slicing operations for list are:

```python
>>> a[::-1] # Reversing a list
[2, 3, 1]
>>> c = a[:] # Shallow copy list
>>> c[0] = -1
>>> a
[1, 3, 2]
>>> c
[-1, 3, 2]
```

### range()

The function has the form `range(start, stop, step)`, see [docs](https://docs.python.org/2/library/functions.html#range). We go from start with increment step until the next step would exceed (or be less than for negative step) stop. Examples:

```python
>>> list(range(0, 10, 2))
[0, 2, 4, 6, 8]
>>> list(range(0, 10, 6))
[0, 6]
>>> list(range(5, 0, -1))
[5, 4, 3, 2, 1]
```

### String slicing

Similar to range for a string `s` we have `s[start:stop]` that goes includes the start element but not the stop element. Examples:

```python
>>> s = "012345"
>>> s[0:2]
"01"
>>> s[1:4]
"123"
>>> s[3:]
"345"
>>> s[:5]
"01234"
```

Can optionally include a `step` i.e. `s[start:stop:step]` which increments the index by step each time. Examples:

```python
>>> s = "012345"
>>> s[1:4:2]
"13"
>>> s[::2]
"024"
```

### Dynamic Arrays

Implememted as `list` in Python.

| Operation | Python | Time Complexity |
|-----------|---------|-----------------|
| Create empty list | `lst = []` | O(1) |
| Create list with items | `lst = [1,2,3]` | O(n) |
| Append item | `lst.append('a')` | O(1) |
| Delete by index | `del lst[0]` | O(n) |
| Remove first occurrence | `lst.remove(x)` | O(n) |
| Check if element exists | `x in lst` | O(n) |
| Pop last item | `lst.pop()` | O(1) |
| Pop item at index | `lst.pop(i)` | O(n) |

### Linked Lists

TODO

### Stacks

Stacks are LIFO (Last In, First Out). Implemented as lists, do `push(), pop()` using `append(), pop()`.

```python
stack = []

stack.append(1) # stack = [1]
stack.append(2) # stack = [1, 2]

stack.pop()  # 2, stack = [1]

top = stack[-1] # 1, stack = [1]
```

Note that as `deque` is a double-ended queue, we can add/remove from both ends in \\(O(1)\\) time. So we can also implement a stack as:

```python
from collections import deque

stack = deque()

stack.append(1) # stack = deque([1])
stack.append(2) # stack = deque([1, 2])

top_item = stack.pop() # 2, stack = deque([1])

top = stack[-1] # 1, stack = deque([1])
```

### Queues

Queues are FIFO (First In, First Out). Use `deque` implementation from `collections`, do `push(), pop()` using `append(), popleft()`.

```python
from collections import deque

queue = deque()

queue.append(1) # queue = deque([1])
queue.append(2) # queue = deque([1, 2])

queue.popleft()  # 1, queue = deque([2])
```

### Binary Trees

TODO

### Hash Maps / Sets

TODO

### Heaps

TODO

### Graphs

TODO

## Algorithms

### Binary Search

Given a array of integers `nums` sorted in increasing order (e.g. `[-1, 0, 2, 3]`) and a target integer `target` we do binary search to find the index of the target as follows:

```python
def binary_search(nums, target):
    n = len(nums)
    l, r = 0, n-1
    while l <= r:
        m = l + (r - l) // 2
        if nums[m] > target: # 
            r = m - 1
        elif nums[m] < target:
            l = m + 1
        else:
            return m
    return -1
```

Time complexity is \\(O(\log n)\\) as we halve the size of the array under consideration on each iteration of the while loop.

### Backtracking

General backtracking algorithm is the following:

```python
def backtrack(state):
    if is_goal(state):
        record_solution(state)
        return

    for choice in choices(state):
        if is_valid(choice, state):
            make_choice(choice, state)
            backtrack(state)
            undo_choice(choice, state)
```

**Time & Space Complexity:**

- `n`: Depth of recursion / number of decisions
- `b`: Branching factor (choices per step)

**Time Complexity  \\(O(b^n)\\):**

In the worst case, we explore all possible combinations of `b` choices at `n` levels:

```text
Level 0:        1 call
Level 1:        b calls
Level 2:        b^2 calls
…
Level n:        b^n calls
```

So in total we have \\(1 + b + b^2 + \dots + b^n\\). This is the sum of a geometric series which equals  \\(\frac{b^{n+1} - 1}{b - 1} = O(b^n)\\)

**Space Complexity \\(O(n)\\):**

The space required during execution is made up of the call stack and the current state. The call stack has size \\(O(n)\\) as it is can be up to the size of the maximum recursion depth. The size of the state depends on the specifics of the problem, but it is also usually of size \\(O(n)\\). This gives the total space complexity of \\(O(n)\\).

### Bucket Sort

This algorithm is useful for problems where we want to get the \\(k\\) most frequent elements in a list.

**Examples:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,2,2,3,3,3], k = 2

Output: [2,3]
```

```text
Input: nums = [7,7], k = 1

Output: [7]
```

```text
Input: nums = [4,1,-1,2,-1,2,3], k = 2

Output: [-1,2]
```

**Code:**

```python
from collections import Counter, defaultdict

def top_k_elements(nums: List[int], k: int)-> List[int]:
        n = len(nums)
        counts = Counter(nums)
        buckets = defaultdict(list)
        for num, count in counts.items():
            buckets[count].append(num)

        res = []
        for count in range(n, 0, -1):
            if k == 0:
                break
    
            if count in buckets:
                res.extend(buckets[count])
                k -= len(buckets[count])
        return res
```

If we take the example input `nums = [4,1,-1,2,-1,2,3], k = 2` then we have that:

```python
counts = {4: 1, 1: 1, -1: 2, 2: 2, 3:1}
buckets = {1: [1, 3, 4], 2: [-1, 2]}
```

The intuition is that the buckets contain the count as the key, and a list of elements with that count as the value. Creating the counts and buckets hash maps only takes \\(O(n)\\) time. We also will not use more than \\(O(n)\\) space as the largest key of the buckets dict is \\(n\\) if all elements in nums are the same, and all other keys are less than this value. All values of the buckets dict are just elements of nums, so we also cannot be larger than \\(O(n)\\) space due to the values of the buckets dict. Given the buckets dict, we can now get the top \\(k\\) elements by starting with the highest possible count and in decreasing order of counts, adding elements to our resulting list until we have \\(k\\) elements.

**Time & Space Complexity:**

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(n)\\)

### Prefix sums

Given an integer array `nums`, return an array output where `output[i]` is the product of all the elements of `nums` except `nums[i]`. The idea is to build two arrays of prefix / suffix products as the constraint is usually that you cannot take the product of all elements in `nums` as it is not guaranteed to fit into a 32-bit int.

**Examples:**

```text
Input: nums = [1,2,4,6]

Output: [48,24,12,8]
```

```text
Input: nums = [-1,0,1,2,3]

Output: [0,-6,0,0,0]
```

**Code:**

```python
def product_except_self(nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
    n = len(nums)

    prefix = [1] * n
    for i in range(1, n):
        prefix[i] = nums[i-1] * prefix[i-1] 

    suffix = [1] * n
    for i in range(n-2, -1, -1):
        suffix[i] = nums[i+1] * suffix[i+1]

    res = []
    for i in range(n):
        res.append(prefix[i] * suffix[i])
    return res
```

This has Time & Space Complexity:

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(n)\\)

We can further reduce the space complexity by building the result in place:

```python
def product_except_self(nums: List[int]) -> List[int]:
    n = len(nums)
    res = [1] * n

    prefix = 1
    for i in range(1, n):
        prefix = nums[i-1] * prefix
        res[i] *= prefix

    suffix = 1
    for i in range(n-2, -1, -1):
        suffix = nums[i+1] * suffix
        res[i] *= suffix

    return res
```

This would then have Time & Space Complexity:

- Time complexity: \\(O(n)\\)
- Space complexity: \\(O(1)\\) (as typically input / output are not counted in space complexity analysis, so we get to ignore the \\(O(n)\\) sized output array we use).
